Introduction
During the weaning period and transition to solid foods in the first year of life, infants take a critical step in their eating behavior and need to meet high nutrient requirements [1, 2]. They are exposed to new foods and food combinations, which should ensure a smooth transition to the family diet later in life. At this stage, either homemade or commercially prepared foods may be fed. It is worth noting that in prosperous countries the modern diet differs considerably from that of previous generations, now dominated by products that have been processed, stored, and transported over great distances. Traditional, cold-pressed vegetable oils of the highest nutritional quality, e.g. extra virgin olive oil, may therefore constitute an important part of the modern diet [3, 4].
In Poland, many infants do not receive any traditional homemade foods and even fruits come from purchased jars. Commercial baby foods are regarded by some parents and medical professionals to be more appropriate for several reasons: they undergo intense screening for contaminants in comparison to foods sold for the general population, contain no additives of certain types, and are thought to be designed to help infants meet nutrient requirements [5]. The process of peeling, however, was identified as the most effective, and simple, procedure in reducing residues, e.g. pesticides, in fruits and vegetables [6]. Moreover, contrary to homemade food, which does not contain furan, the highest average content of this chemical was found in ready-to-eat baby foods with pasta meals, followed by vegetable meals and meals with meat [7]. Furan is considered to be potentially hazardous chemical and is classified as a possible carcinogen. The problem of this chemical in homemade food may only arise if meals with potatoes are stored and then hardly re-heated [7].
There is a growing body of evidence that flavor experiences and dietary patterns in childhood influence these patterns later in life [1, 8, 9]. It is most likely early in life that culture-specific flavor preferences are initiated [10, 11]. Consequently, exposure to flavors and smells of transitory foods may serve to heighten preferences for "known tastes" in the family diet later in adulthood. Moreover, adopting elements of childhood dinner patterns was recognized to be an important part of the social reproduction of family identities across generations [12].
Processing industries have been successful in manufacturing and marketing jarred baby foods on a commercial scale. Available products contain different ingredients and depend on the manufacturer, country, traditional cuisine, income rate, and lastly, personal beliefs and values of parents [9, 11]. Jarred foods with vegetables, meats, and desserts may contain added fat from a variety of sources: vegetable oils, cow milk butter, or cream. Manufacturer advertising makes the majority of consumers feel safe, causing them to believe that they are doing the best possible in buying given products [11]. A noteworthy fact is that many types of baby foods produced by international manufacturers are, in essence, the same mixtures with different names; this procedure aims to exploit the specifics of local markets without delivering any new, real value [11].
In the book, How to Eat Well and Stay Well the Mediterranean Way by Keys [13] first used the term "good Mediterranean diet" to describe the eating patterns of populations dwelling in southern Europe, where the olive tree (Olea europaea) is an emblematic species [4, 14]. There is variation between the exact diet in different parts of the Mediterranean region. However, generalized and distinctive dietary patterns do exist, including olive oil as the main source of visible fat, employed both in cooking and as a dressing, moderate fish and poultry but low red meat consumption, high intake of vegetables, fruits, legumes, nuts, and whole-grain cereals [4, 14-16]. When dietary fats are added, in accordance with the traditional Mediterranean diet, olive oil is the choice for children [17]. It has been repeatedly observed that individuals applying the Mediterranean diet have reduced risks of type 2 diabetes and other diseases associated with the metabolic syndrome, autoimmunological diseases, and certain forms of cancer [18]. Moreover, considerable evidence exists that the Mediterranean diet increases quality of life in the course of ageing, as well as longevity [13, 19]. The health benefits of olive oil have been attributed to two main constituents: a high oleic acid (monounsaturated fatty acid, 18:1n-9) content (70-85%) and a large amount of antioxidant compounds, which also possess antiviral, antibacterial, and immunomodulating effects [3, 4, 14, 16]. Polyphenols found in virgin olive oil are linked to both its flavor and its remarkable stability [3].
The introduction of solid foods in infancy is one of the primary matters often discussed by parents with their child's pediatrician. However, many parents do not feel that the diet of their child may be linked to poor health outcomes in the future. Parents should be educated about the interplay of environmental and genetic influences on children, specifically during the early years of development when the child is maturing and taking control of its own diet [11]. Nutrition educators should increase the critical awareness of parents in relation to their child's solid food choices. It is important to emphasize to parents the fundamental role that the Mediterranean diet and consumption of foods with olive oil play in a healthy life style [14, 20]. Parental management of the family food environment may be complicated by numerous mitigating factors, e.g. health literacy, time availability, and financial resources. Considering the role baby food manufacturers play in the infant's contextual environment, their products, as well as the manufacturers themselves, should also be viewed as key players and central agents in establishing dietary habits. Consequently, we attempted to survey manufacturer claims concerning added fat in jarred infant foods supplied to the Polish market.
