Different ROC analysis
When the true positive peptides are not known a priori, there exist various strategies in classifying hits into true or false positives when making a ROC plot. These strategies, unfortunately, will make a notable difference in retrieval assessment. For example, in a cell lysate experiment of a certain organism, it is customary to estimate the number of false positive hits by introducing a decoy database during the data analysis. The main idea there is to first sort the peptide hits according to their scores. Then for each decoy hit, one assumes that there is just one corresponding false hit in the target database. This strategy has been used extensively [24]. ROC analyses done this way generally count false positives, which are highly homologous to the target peptides, towards true positives. This has two effects: an overcount of true positives and a undercount of false positives. As a consequence, the ROC curves will appear more impressive. To mimick this situation, we used BLAST to find in the NCBI's nr database highly homologous proteins to the target proteins used in the experiment and include those proteins in our true positive set. This strategy produces ROC curves shown as the solid curves of Figure S8. When compared to Figure 6 and Figure S6, the ROC curves produced by this strategy seem much more impressive.
Not counting highly homologous proteins as false positives would probably be agreeable. However, counting those peptides/proteins as true positives could be exaggerating. Therefore one may use a slightly different strategy: removing from consideration proteins homologous to the target proteins, which is called the cluster removal strategy [11]. The dashed curves of Figure S9 are ROC curves obtained this way. This strategy also produces slightly more impressive ROC curves than in Figure 6 and Figure S6. Apparently, this indicates the highly homologous false positive hits are the ones that degrade the retrieval performance. Thus, it can be useful to remove those false positives from consideration. Keeping only the best hit per spectrum turns out to be one way to achieve this goal.
