4.
The kinetochore
The arguments built in the previous section lead to the conclusion that it is essential to understand error correction and spindle checkpoint signalling in the context of the complex structural organization of the kinetochore. A complete account of kinetochore organization is beyond the scope of this review and several reviews on this topic have been made available recently [21,22]. Suffice to say that kinetochores are thought to consist of an inner plate hosting an interface between the 15-subunit constitutive centromere-associated network (CCAN) and specialized centromeric chromatin; and an outer plate containing the 10-subunit KMN network (from the initials of its Knl1, Mis12 and Ndc80 subcomplexes) implicated in microtubule binding. The CCAN and KMN networks are tightly connected. An interaction between CENP-C (CCAN) and the Mis12 complex (KMN network) provides an important point of contact [81-83]. The existence of additional points of contact, including one between CENP-T (CCAN) and the Ndc80 subcomplex (KMN network) [83,84], is supported by extensive analyses of localization dependencies of kinetochore proteins and from initial experiments of biochemical reconstitution.
Biochemical and structural studies, including super-resolution investigations of kinetochore organization by fluorescence microscopy, have finally resulted in rather precise maps of the relative position of many structural kinetochore proteins and of several checkpoint components [85-88]. For instance, these studies clarified that the highly elongated 4-subunit Ndc80 complex, conserved in all eukaryotes, orients its approximately 60 nm long axis at a relatively small angle with the inter-kinetochore axis [85-87]. The kinetochore-binding end of the Ndc80 complex was predicted to be positioned near the Mis12 and Knl1 complexes [87,88], and this prediction was fully confirmed in experiments of biochemical reconstitution [89].
In prophase Drosophila melanogaster S2 cells, the C-terminal region of the Ndc80 subunit is located approximately 65 nm outward (i.e. towards the microtubule) relative to CENP-A, the histone H3 variant that marks centromeres from yeast to humans [40]. Remarkably, it was shown that this distance increases to approximately 100 nm when kinetochores experience microtubule-dependent tension at metaphase [40]. This phenomenon is now known as intra-kinetochore stretch or tension [40,90]. A major task for the future is to understand how intra-kinetochore stretch is generated when microtubules bind the kinetochore. At one extreme, intra-kinetochore stretching might be the result of a discreet conformational change in the kinetochore caused by microtubule binding [22,91]. While this is possible, it seems unlikely when considering the great structural complexity of kinetochores. Each microtubule-binding site contains six to eight copies of the approximately 30 structural kinetochore components [85]. Furthermore, in most species, kinetochores are designed to bind multiple microtubules. Plausibly, each microtubule-binding site becomes engaged at a different time. Thus, it may be more sensible to interpret intra-kinetochore stretching as a progressive, continuous distortion of the kinetochore when microtubules are added. In agreement with this idea, intermediate levels of stretching are observed when microtubule end dynamics are inhibited through addition of taxol [40].
Importantly, intra-kinetochore stretch was shown to correlate with the status of checkpoint activation, with high stretch being correlated with checkpoint satisfaction. This idea of checkpoint control is alternative to a previous idea that tension might be monitored at the centromere, i.e. between sister kinetochores (inter-kinetochore tension) [46]. A significant theoretical limitation of the idea that the checkpoint sensor monitors tension between sister kinetochores is that it is not applicable to meiosis I, when the sisters co-orient and the homologues pair through the chiasmata. Conversely, the intra-kinetochore tension idea is also applicable to checkpoint control in meiosis I.
