Prophylactic thyroidectomy in MEN IIA: does the calcitonin level correlate with tumor spread? 
BACKGROUND: The fate of patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia of type II A (MEN II A) is determined by medullary thyroid carcinoma, which occurs in all cases. This has led to the therapeutic concept of prophylactic thyroidectomy in affected family members with the goal of removing the thyroid before the manifestation of carcinoma. We investigated a prophylactically thyroidectomized MEN II A population to determine whether the highly specific and sensitive tumor marker calcitonin correlates with tumor spread. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Fifteen patients with MEN II A (aged 4-24 years) who had undergone prophylactic thyroidectomy since 1990 were included in the study. Baseline and pentagastrin-stimulated calcitonin levels were preoperatively determined in all cases. The indication for surgery was established on the basis of pathologic calcitonin levels in the first seven patients and on the basis of detected RET proto-oncogene mutation in the other eight patients. Bilateral central lymphadenectomy was performed in all patients in addition to thyroidectomy. RESULTS: Histology demonstrated C-cell hyperplasia in five patients (aged 4-13 years), unilateral medullary microcarcinoma in six (aged 9-17 years) and a bilateral medullary microcarcinoma in three cases (aged 17-24 years). One 9-year-old boy with bilateral microcarcinoma already had a lymph node metastasis. The mean baseline calcitonin level correlated with the histologic findings (r=0.71, P=0.003) but there was no correlation between pentagastrin-stimulated calcitonin levels and histology (r=0.21, P=0.47). CONCLUSION: In MEN II A patients undergoing prophylactic thyroidectomy, baseline but not stimulated calcitonin levels already correlate with the histologic tumor stage at the stage of clinically occult C-cell hyperplasia or medullary microcarcinoma. However, biochemical screening cannot reliably discriminate the transition from C-cell hyperplasia to invasive microcarcinoma. Individuals with MEN IIA should therefore undergo early prophylactic thyroidectomy once the diagnosis is confirmed by molecular genetic testing.
