Historical Background of PTSD
PTSD gained acceptance in the medical and psychiatric community after a number of studies appeared in prominent medical and psychiatric journals describing the psychiatric symptoms of soldiers who had served and fought in the Vietnam War (Fox 1972; Goldsmith and Cretekos 1969). Subsequent publications described the profound psychological and emotional sequelae secondary to being exposed to extremely traumatic events such as fires, explosions, floods, torture, serious motor vehicle accidents (MVAs), violent crimes, and sexual assault (e.g., Horowitz 1976). These publications posited that individuals with PTSD no longer felt in control of their lives, viewed the world as an unpredictable and dangerous place, lived in fear, and reported a loss of trust in a "just world." These studies also reported that individuals with PTSD avoided thoughts or situations that might trigger traumatic memories, complained of feelings of emotional numbness, and exhibited symptoms of blunted affect.
The conceptual refinements coupled with the empirical information generated by these studies significantly advanced our understanding of individuals who have been exposed to a traumatic stressor. This led in 1980 to the inclusion of the diagnostic criteria for PTSD in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders III (DSM-III; American Psychiatric Association 1980). At that time, PTSD was defined as a syndrome that developed in response to a "stressor that would evoke significant symptoms of distress in almost everyone" (p. 238). The DSM-III criteria also required that the individual who developed PTSD had to have been directly exposed to a traumatic event. The DSM-IV criteria (APA 1994) significantly broadened the definition of PTSD to include (a) a "personal experience of an event that involves actual or threatened death or serious injury, or other threat to one's physical integrity" (p. 463) or (b) witnessing a comparable traumatic event or even "learning about unexpected or violent death, serious harm, or threat of death or injury experienced by a family member or a close associate" (p. 462). As a consequence of these modifications, the DSM-IV diagnostic criteria for PTSD have been criticized for failing to discriminate between symptoms of PTSD and normal stress reactions (e.g., learning about the 9/11 disaster; Wakefield and Spitzer 2002).

