Angiogenesis-a novel therapeutic approach for ischemic heart disease.
Angiogenesis is the biologic process of forming new blood vessels. Undoubtedly, blood vessels growth regulation is a vital aspect in health and disease. Under physiological conditions, angiogenesis is regulated by local balance between endogenous stimulators and inhibitors of this process. In many diseases state body loses control over angiogenesis. Angiogenesis-dependent diseases result when new blood vessels either grow excessively or insufficiently. Insufficient angiogenesis occurs in diseases such as coronary artery disease, stroke and chronic wounds. Myocardial ischemia both acute and chronic has been clearly shown to stimulate angiogenesis in many experimental models. Therapeutic angiogenesis is the biological agents or bioactive material to stimulate the growth of new blood vessels. Traditional coronary revascularization therapies such as coronary angioplasty or bypass graft surgery, act by restoring blood flow through the preexisting coronary vessels. One limitation of these approaches, however, may be the failure to normalize myocardial perfusion, due to the concomitant presence or small of resistance vessel disease. In contrast, therapeutic angiogenesis is based on the concept that coronary collateral development may be stimulated by pharmacological or molecular means and can limit myocardial ischemia. Studies, both in human and animal models support the notion that, various angiogenic growth factors and progenitor cells can enhance new blood vessels. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), fibroblast growth factor (FGF), recombinant proteins and bone marrow stem cells are currently used therapeutic stimulators for angiogenesis. As coronary artery disease is the major cause of death in the developed societies and also an emerging health problem in developing countries like Bangladesh therapeutic angiogenesis may provide hope as a new treatment modality for ischemic heart disease with or in place of current therapies.
